\section{Timing}

\subsection{Fluorescence}

rise time - 0.9 ns, decay time - 2.1 ns, pulse width 2.5 ns.

\todo{deexcitation fast (2.1 ns), slow phosphorescence
      (14.2 ns), ratio?}


\subsection{Light transport and \pmt efficiency}

Similar to the model that predicts the signal transport efficiency in
the scintillator a models that calculates the transport time of these
photons has been made. Quantum efficiency of the \pmt causes not every
photon reaching the \pmt to produce a photoelectron. Multiple photons
are required for the \pmt to produce a significant signal that the
\hisparc electronics triggers. The model tracks the time at which the
15th photon producing a photoelectron reaches the \pmt. 15
photoelectrons are required for a signal of \SI{70}{\milli\volt} (high
threshold).

In the simulations for each particle within the bounds of the
scintillator a number is taken from this distribution simulate the
transport time of each particle.

\begin{figure}
    \centering
    \input{plots/response/transport_time}
    \caption{\captitle{Signal transport time.} Time transport
             distribution in the detector.}
    \label{fig:transport_time}
\end{figure}


\subsection{\pmt transport, cable length}

The time it takes for the electron cascade in the \pmt to go from the
front window to the anode is dependent on .. the high voltage of pmt,
position electron hits, etc? Possible second pulse from ionization of
atoms in tube.

The signal from the \pmt is transported over a \SI{30}{\meter} long
coaxial cable to the \hisparc electronics before it is digitized. To
keep the detectors in sync the cables are precisely cut to the
same length. The signal in the cables propagates at 2/3 the speed of
light or \SI{.2}{\meter\per\nano\second}. Every \SI{.2}{\meter}
difference in cable length increases the offset by a nanosecond. Kinks
and twists in the cable can also increase the propagation time.

The offset between detectors can change over time due to aging of the
\pmt, changes in the high voltage and modifications to the cables.

Offsets are determined by looking at the arrival time differences
between two detectors over many events. All events in which a signal was
detected in the reference detector (usually detector 2, because of its
central location in 4-detector stations) and in another detector are
used. Multiple events are needed to even out time differences due to the
arrival direction of the showers, transport time and the shower front.
The time difference distribution between two detectors includes a
background of accidental coincidences.

To determine the distribution of the mean offsets the distributions for
a day of data for all stations have been fit by Gaussians, the found
averages are then the distribution of the offsets. These have also been
fit by a Gaussian \figref{fig:detector_offset_distribution}. In
simulations a detector offset is drawn from this distribution and then
fixed for that detector for the entire simulation.

\todo{relative to detector 2.. different sigma if offset also given to
      detector 2?}

\begin{figure}
    \centering
    \input{plots/response/detector_offset_distribution}
    \caption{\captitle{Detector offset distribution.} In black the mean
             detector offsets for all detectors relative to detector 2
             in each station are plotted. The gray line is a fit
             Gaussian. The mean of the offset distribution is
             \SI{0}{\nano\second} and the sigma is
             \SI{2.7}{\nano\second}.}
    \label{fig:detector_offset_distribution}
\end{figure}


\todo{Pulseheight/integral, Number of particles. Leptons and gammas,
      separate?}
